h2. Databases

The database backup configuration became simpler overall. Instead of backing up the databases one at a time and taking almost an hour to do so due to the expanded nature of the queries, I figured I'd capitalize on the LAN.

Databases are ALL backed up from the production server down to the staging server at 2am every morning. I use the biggest chunk size and most compression possible to get that query data down as quickly as possible.

As soon as the big backup completes, the normal backup procedure commences using the staging server as the origin. The staging server is then responsible for generating the expanded queries and utilizes the LAN speeds to transmit them to the archive.

h2. Conclusions

Commits now take a little longer to push up due to the I/O of updating all of the branches of some of the bigger sites. Some sites had some really stale branches left over from previous development. These branches needed a good pruning, but it's good to remember every time a developer makes a new branch, they are checking out an entirely new copy of the site.

Feedback from clients is pretty positive, be sure to explain that the data is wiped every morning and that -some- none of the uploads aren't synchronized yet.

Internally, it's great to have a single platform where all of the sites work the exact same way and some minute configuration on a developer's machine doesn't get in the way of the site's function when hunting down a bug.

Stay tuned, many optimizations to come.
